# Exercise Set IV

### Exercise 28

The first example is a set of keywords related to the internet/cellphone traffic providers: both are oligopolistic markets, so have only a few (5-6 seems like a reasonable estimate) highly competing bidders with almost identical services, and the service itself is very demanded and searched for since it is of first necessity nowadays.

The second example might be related to some "prestigious" goods: watches, musical instruments. The corresponding markets are usually oligopolistic as well, the goods are similar in their characteristics among manufacturers, and one of the important factors of selection between them is exactly how strongly they are advertising, so bidders are willing to pay relatively large amounts for popping up higher in the search.

### Exercise 29

By definition,
$$
p_i(\mathbf{b}) = \max_{\omega \in \Omega} \sum_{j \ne i} b_j(\omega) - \sum_{j \ne i} b_j(\omega^*).
$$
Just from the $\max$ properties, for all $\omega$,  $\max_{\omega \in \Omega} \sum_{j \ne i} b_i(\omega) \ge \sum_{j \ne i} b_i(\omega)$, so their-difference is always non-negative. For $\omega = \omega^*$ this difference give us the payment, so we've just proved the first part.

Now, let's represent the payment as the difference of bid and rebate:
$$
p_i(\mathbf{b}) = b_i(\omega^*) - \left[ \max_{\omega \in \Omega}\sum_{j} b_j(w) - \max_{\omega\in\Omega} \sum_{j\ne i} b_j(\omega) \right].
$$
Since all bids are non-negative, the rebate also must be non-negative (we can't decrease the maximum by adding one more non-negative term), so $p_i(\mathbf{b})$ can be at most $b_i(\omega^*)$. 

### Exercise 30

The surplus-maximizing algorithm acts like this:

1. Find the bidder $i_1$ and the good $j_1$ such that $v_{i_1j_1}$ is maximized, allocate $j_1$ to $i_1$;
2. Find the bidder $i_2 \ne i_1$ and  the good $j_2 \ne j_1$ such that $v_{i_2j_2}$ is maximized, allocate $j_2$ to $i_2$;
3. Find the bidder $i_3 \notin \{i_1, i_2\}$ and the good $j_2 \notin \{j_1, j_2\}$ such that $v_{i_3j_3}$ is maximized, allocate $j_3$ to $i_3$;
4. Continue until either all goods are allocated (if $m \le n$) or every bidder gets some good (then, allocate the remaining goods in some arbitrary fashion).

This algorithm runs in $O(m^2n)$ time. We also need to run it $n+1$ times ($1$ to find the optimal allocation, $n$ to construct payments), so the total complexity is $O(m^2 n^2)$. Actually, it might be even smaller because with every iteration, the list of possible $i$'s and $j$'s to pick from decreases. But, anyway, it's polynomial. 

### Exercise 31

If only the first two bidders are present, the algorithm allocates either both goods $AB$ to the bidder #1 or good $A$ to the bidder #2. In both cases, the surplus is $1$. The payment of the winning player is also $1$: in an surplus-maximizing auction without him, the remaining agent gets the surplus of $1$, and with him, the remaining agent gets 0, so the winner pays the difference which is $1$.

In all three bidders are present, the algorithm allocates good $A$ to the bidder #2 and good $B$ to the bidder #3, with the total surplus of $2$. Both winners pay $0$. Let's see from #3's perspective (for #2 it's the same): in a surplus-maximizing auction without him, remaining agents get the total surplus of $1$ (see the previous case), and with him, remaining agents also get $1$, so the difference (and the payment) is $0$. 

In a single-item Vickrey auction, adding an extra bidder can only increase the revenue if 

* he is the new highest bidder (then he pays the current highest bid)

* he is the new second-highest bidder (then the current winner pays more)

In other cases, the revenue doesn't change. And, surely, it never decreases. 

### Exercise 32

Let's consider a combinatorial auction with two goods $A$ and $B$ and three bidders with the following valuations:

* $v_1(AB) = 9$, otherwise $0$;
* $v_2(A) = v_2(AB) = 4$, otherwise $0$;
* $v_3(B) = v_3(AB) = 4$, otherwise $0$.

Under truthful bidding, both goods are allocated by the VCG to the player $1$. But if players $2$ and $3$ collude and both submit the false bids $b_2(A) = 6$, $b_3(B) = 6$ for the desired goods, then the VCG will allocate $A$ to player $2$, $B$ to player $3$, charge both $9-6=3$, leaving both with positive utility of $4-3=1$.

This collusion makes no sense in the Vickrey auction: if both players don't win the auction, then even if they both submit false large bids and manage to win, the winner will pay at least the highest valuation, which, obviously, leads to negative utility for him.

### Exercise 33

Here we can use the example from the exercise 31. Let's imagine that we have two bidders: #1 who wants both $A$ and $B$ with valuation of $1$, and #2 who wants only $A$ with valuation of, again, $1$. VCG results in #2 getting always a zero utility. But if #2 decides to submit two bids instead of one under different names ($b_2(A) = 1$, $b_3(B)=1$, $b_2(AB) = b_3(AB) = 1$, $0$ otherwise), he would win both goods and pay $0$, increasing his total utility to $1$.

This doesn't happen in the Vickrey auction:

* the winning bidder would still pay at least the second highest bid;
* the losing bidder can't get the good without paying more than his valuation.

### Exercise 34

If $i$ wins with the bid $b_i$, then, at any iteration of the greedy selection procedure, either

* $i$ can't be removed because it leads to an infeasible outcome;
* $i$ can be removed but doesn't have the highest score among the bidders who can be safely removed.

Let's now assume $i$'s bid decreased to $b_i^\prime$, while other bidders' bids remained the same, and let's imagine that for some reason the procedure decided to eliminate $i$ at some iteration $k$. Notice that outcomes of all previous iterations couldn't change &mdash; they simply didn't depend on $i$'s bid. But

* if, after $k-1$ iterations of the procedure with the original bids, removing $i$ leads to an infeasible outcome, then it is still infeasible after $k-1$ equivalent iterations of the procedure with smaller $b_i^\prime$;
* if $i$ can be removed at iteration $k$ of the original procedure, but his score is too small, then he clearly shouldn't be removed in the new procedure since his score is even smaller (scoring is an increasing in $b_i$, other factors remain the same).

So, the described situation is impossible, i.e., $i$ can't lose by decreasing his bid, and the allocation rule is indeed monotone.