# Exercise Set V

### Exercise 35

An auction that gives the good randomly for free and charges the winner $0$ is DSIC (no sense in strategic behavior when you have no impact on the outcome) and, obviously, budget-respecting.
All bidders can win with an equal probability, so, for any valuations profile $\{v_1, \dots, v_n\}$, the expected surplus of this auction is

$$
\frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^n v_i \ge \frac{1}{n} \max_i v_i.
$$

### Exercise 36

I'm absolutely desperate with this one. If anyone who reads this has any idea how to solve it, I implore you to help me.

### Exercise 37

To prove monotonicity, we need to show that 1) a losing agent can't win by decreasing the bid and 2) a wining agent can't lose by increasing the bid.
Let's fix the bids profile $(b_1, \dots, b_i, \dots, b_n)$, and the player $i$.
Notice that the mechanism allocates the good to the player $i^* = \arg \max_j ( \min\{b_j, B_j\} )$.

1. If $i$ loses the auction, $\min\{b_i, B_i\}$ is not the maximum among players. If $i$ decreases the bid, this expression can only get smaller, which guarantees that $i$ won't be selected as winner.
3. If $i$ wins the auction, $\min\{b_i, B_i\}$ is the maximum among players. If $i$ increases the bid, this expression can only get larger, so $i$ will still be selected as winner.

So, the allocation rule is indeed monotone.

By Myerson's lemma, the winner $i^\*$'s payment $p_{i^\*}$ equals the second highest value of $\min\\{b_j, B_j\\}$.
Obviously, $p_{i^\*} \le \min \\{b_{i^\*}, B_{i^\*}\\} \le B_{i^\*}$ , i.e. the winner cannot be charged more than their budget.

### Exercise 38

The described mechanism can be interpreted as the nice classical Vickrey auction that first truncates valuations that are beyond the budget.
Effectively, it does not allow players to gain the competitive advantage by claiming the value that they can't pay.

On the other hand, it can completely fail the surplus maximization if all valuations are much beyond players' budgets, but this budget-to-valuation ratio is not very realistic.

### Exercise 39

In the multi-good setting, the mechanism is still DSIC, which is good.
The problem is that can ignore surplus maximization, even in  scenarios with reasonable budget-to-valuation ratios.
Imagine $m$ is large enough so that we're left with many goods after "filling the budgets" of all players.
From this point, the mechanism is indifferent on who to allocate the remaining goods, because all the allocations yield the same value of its objective. Thus, it can allocate them very inefficiently in terms of surplus.

### Exercise 40

Simple proof by example.
Imagine we have 2 goods and 2 players $A$ and $B$.
$A$'s budget and valuation are $8$, $B$'s &mdash; 6.
If both report truthfully, the first good goes to player $A$ at price 3 (reducing their budget to 5), and the second good goes to player $B$ at price 5.
Players end up with utilities of 5 and 1, respectively.

Now, what if $B$ decides to cheat?
If they report the budget and bid of $7$, the first good will go to $A$ at a higher price of 3.5, reducing the budget of the latter to 4.5 &mdash; the price at which the second good is later sold to $B$.
Finally, players end up with utilities of 4.5 and 1.5, respectively.
As we see, $B$ is able to gain from non-truthful declaration, so the mechanism is not DSIC.

### Exercise 41

Two convincing observations:

* If at some iteration multiple cycles are formed, all of them eventually will be chosen independently of the order;
    * once a cycle is formed, it will persist in all next iterations until being selected by the algorithm, because all agents from this cycle will continue pointing out to the same houses;
* choosing a cycle $B$ instead of $A$ can't result in appearance of the cycles that wouldn't eventually appear if we chose $A$ over $B$;
    * let's call agents who point at houses from $A$ as $X$ and those who point at houses from $B$ as $Y$; obviously $A$, $B$, $X$ and $Y$ are all disjoint sets;
    * if $A$ is chosen first, agents from $X$ become free and get split into two groups:
        * $X_1$, who "wait" to form a cycle with agents from $Y$;
        * $X_2$, who participate in cycles not involving anyone from $Y$;
    * if we choose $B$ first instead, agents from $Y$ become free and get split into two groups:
        * $Y_1$, who "wait" to form a cycle with agents from $X$;
        * $Y_2$, who participate in cycles not involving anyone from $X$;
    * in both cases, we have only these groups of cycles involving agents from $X$ and $Y$:
        * containing somebody from $X_1$ and somebody from $Y_1$ (appear only after choosing $A$ and $B$, independently of order);
        * containing somebody from $X_2$ and nobody from $Y$ (appear only after choosing $A$, regardless of $B$);
        * containing somebody from $Y_2$ and nobody from $X$ (appear only after choosing $B$, regardless of $A$);
    * all these three groups are independent of the order in which $A$ and $B$ are chosen, while players outside of $X$ and $Y$ are not affected by this order at all.

### Exercise 42

Let's suppose some agent $i$ is not matched when reporting truthfully, and decides to under-report their matches $F_i \subset E_i$.

Two observations about the results of this action:
* no new matchings can be created (some might get removed though);
* the initial matching (the one selected when all agents report truthfully) is still present since it doesn't contain any of the removed edges (otherwise $i$ would be matched initially).

Since no new candidate matchings are added, and the original matching is still present, the mechanism would again select the latter, leaving $i$ unmatched again.
I.e., an unmatched agent $i$ can't get matched by under-reporting their possible matches, and the suggested mechanism is DSIC.

### Exercise 43

The worst-case scenario: every man have to make an offer to every woman before finally getting accepted (and not dropped after it), and all women have to accept every offer. This happens if all men's preference profiles look like this:

$$
w_1 \succ w_2 \succ \dots \succ w_n,
$$

while all women's preference profiles are

$$
m_n \succ m_{n-1} \succ \dots \succ m_1.
$$

So, first all men from $m_1, \dots, m_n$ would go to the lady $w_1$, and she'd be glad to accept all of them, finally sticking to $m_n$.
All disappointed men $m_1, \dots, m_{n-1}$ would then go to $w_2$, and, the story repeats, she'd accept and later reject them all, finally sticking to $m_{n-1}$.
After long (approx. $\frac{n^2}{2}$ iterations) journey, very sad for men and happy for women, the algorithm would produce a stable matching $\{(m_i, w_{n-i})\}_{i=1}^n$.

### Exercise 44

Conceptually, a woman $w_1$ might benefit from rejecting the man $m_2$ who's not her not top preference (and who she'd normally accept if reported truthfully) so that $m_2$ "occupied" a women $w_2$ who otherwise would have accepted a man $m_1$ who is a top preference of $w_1$.
Finally, $m_1$ would get rejected by $w_2$ and come to $w_1$ who would be completely happy with this.
To do so, $w_1$ must put someone above $m_2$ (but below $m_1$) in her preferences.
Sounds complicated, let's see an example.

Assume there are 3 men and 3 women with the following preference profiles:

$$
\begin{aligned}
m_1:\ w_1 \succ w_2 \succ w_3, \\
m_2:\ w_1 \succ w_2 \succ w_3, \\
m_3:\ w_3 \succ w_1 \succ w_2, \\
w_1:\ m_3 \succ m_2 \succ m_1, \\
w_2:\ m_1 \succ m_2 \succ m_3, \\
w_3:\ m_1 \succ m_2 \succ m_3.
\end{aligned}
$$

Under truthful bidding, Gale-Shapley algorithm acts as follows:
1. $m_1$ goes to $w_1$, $w_1$ accepts; matched $(m_1, w_1)$;
2. $m_2$ goes to $w_1$, $w_1$ accepts; matched $(m_2, w_1)$;
3. $m_3$ goes to $w_3$, $w_3$ accepts; matched $(m_2, w_1), (m_3, w_3)$;
4. $m_1$ goes to $w_2$, $w_2$ accepts; matched $(m_1, w_2), (m_2, w_1), (m_3, w_3)$.

$w_1$ is OK, but she might do even better by submitting the preference profile $m_3 \succ m_1 \succ m_2$. Let's see:
1. $m_1$ goes to $w_1$, $w_1$ accepts; matched $(m_1, w_1)$;
2. $m_2$ goes to $w_1$, $w_1$ rejects; matched $(m_1, w_1)$;
3. $m_3$ goes to $w_3$, $w_3$ accepts; matched $(m_1, w_1), (m_3, w_3)$;
4. $m_2$ goes to $w_3$, $w_3$ accepts; matched $(m_1, w_1), (m_2, w_3)$;
5. $m_3$ goes to $w_1$, $w_1$ accepts; matched $(m_2, w_3), (m_3, w_1)$;
6. $m_1$ goes to $w_2$, $w_2$ accepts; matched $(m_1, w_2), (m_2, w_3), (m_3, w_1)$.

As we see, $w_1$ is now better off by getting her top preference $m_3$ instead of $m_2$ when she reported her preferences truthfully.
