# Exercise Set VI

### Exercise 45

A multi-commodity flow is a tuple $f = (f_1, \dots, f_k)$ of single-commodity flows, and every single-commodity flow $f_i$ is understood as the distribution of $r_i$ units of traffic over the set $\mathcal P_i$ of all $s_i-t_i$ paths, so that  $\sum_{P \in \mathcal P_i} f_i^P = r_i$, where $f_i^P$ is amount of traffic of respective flow $f_i$ that goes through path $P \in \mathcal P_i$.

A multi-commodity flow $f$ is called equilibrium if every single-commodity flow $f_i$ follows only the shortest $s_i-t_i$ paths w.r.t. the current flow, i.e. simultaneously for all $i$ holds
$$
f_i^{\hat P} > 0 
\Rightarrow
\hat P \in \underset{P \in \mathcal P_i}{\arg\min}
	\underbrace{\sum_{e \in P} c_e(f_e)}_{ := C_{P}(f)},
$$
where $f_e$ is the total amount of traffic from all flows that goes through the edge $e$, i.e.,
$$
f_e = \sum_{i=1}^k \sum_{P \in \mathcal P_i\ :\ e \in P} f_i^P.
$$

### Exercise 46

Total travel time by path:
$$
C(f) = \sum_{i=1}^k \sum_{P \in \mathcal P_i} f_i^P c_{P} (f).
$$
Total travel time by edge:
$$
C(f) = \sum_{e \in E} f_e c_e(f_e).
$$

### Exercise 47

The proof of the fact that POA in every multi-commodity network with cost functions from a given family is upper-bounded by the POA of a Pigou-like network almost entirely replicates the proof for single-commodity networks. The minor change is how we show that the total cost of equilibrium of is lower than the cost of optimal flow with edge costs frozen at the optimal level.

Total cost of equilibrium flow $f$: 
$$
C(f) 
	= \sum_{i=1}^k \sum_{P \in \mathcal P_i} 
	\underbrace{f_i^P}_{\text{sums up to } r_i} 
	\underbrace{c_{P} (f)}_{\ = L_i \text{ if } f_i^P > 0} 
	= \sum_{i=1}^k r_i L_i.
$$
Total cost of optimal flow $f^*$ with frozen costs:
$$
\sum_{i=1}^k \sum_{P \in \mathcal P_i} 
	\underbrace{f_i^{*P}}_{\text{sums up to } r_i} 
	\underbrace{c_{P} (f)}_{\ge L_i} 
\ge \sum_{i=1}^k r_i L_i.
$$
The rest of the proof is the same.

Now, let's consider a multi-commodity network that consists of $k$ replicas of Pigou-like networks each with its own source-target pair $s_i - t_i$ but all with the same amount of traffic $r$. We can easily convince ourselves that POA in this network equals $\alpha(\mathcal C)$, so the Pigou bound is tight.

### Exercise 48

We're solving the following problem:
$$
\alpha(\mathcal C) = 
	\sup_{c \in \mathcal C} \max_{r \ge 0} \max_{x \ge 0} 
		\frac{r \cdot c(r)}{x \cdot c(x) + (r - x) \cdot c(r)}.
$$
By $\sup_{c \in \mathcal C}$ we understand $\max_{a, b \ge 0}$. 

The inner-loop maximization is equivalent to minimization of $f(x) = x (ax + b) + (r - x) (ar + b)$ over $x \ge 0$. By taking the derivative and equating it to $0$, we get $x = \frac{r}{2}$. 

Next, we maximize a function $g(r) = \frac{r c(r)}{\frac{r}{2} c(r) + \frac{r}{2} c(r/2)}$ over $r \ge 0$. After all simplifications,
$$
g(r) = 1 + \frac{1}{3 + \frac{4b}{a} r},
$$
which is a decreasing function of $r$ that is maximized at $r = 0$, giving $g(0) = \frac{4}{3}$. Additional maximization step over $a$ and $b$ doesn't change anything, so we finally arrive to $\alpha(\mathcal C) = \frac{4}{3}$. 

### Exercise 49

Let $f^*$ be an optimal flow with $r$ units of traffic, and $f$ be an equilibrium with $r/2$ units, i.e.,
$$
\sum_{e \in E} f_e^* = r,\ \sum_{e \in E} f_e = \frac{r}{2}.
$$
 Then we have
$$
\sum_{e \in E} f_e^* c_e(f_e^*) 
	\ge \sum_{e \in E} f_e c_e(f_e)
	= \sum_{e \in E} 2 f_e \frac{1}{2} c_e \left( \frac{2 f_e}{2}\right) 
	= \sum_{e \in E} \tilde f_e \tilde c_e( \tilde f_e ),
$$
where $\tilde f_e = 2 f_e \Rightarrow \sum_{e \in E} \tilde f_e = 2 r / 2 = r$. So, we arrive to the conclusion that cost of the equilibrium flow $\tilde f$ with modified cost functions $\{\tilde c_e\}$ is at most the cost of the optimal flow with original cost functions $\{c_e\}$. 

Also, if $c_e(x) = \frac{1}{u_e - x}$, then $\tilde c_e(x) = \frac{1}{2} \frac{1}{u_e - \frac{x}{2}} = \frac{1}{2u_e - x}$, which is equivalent to doubling the capacity of an edge.

### Exercise 50

To show that we only need to change $2$ to $1 + \delta$ in the original proof, as nothing else changes there. The inequality 
$$
f_e^* \left[ c_e(f_e) - c_e(f_e^*)\right] \le f_e c_e(f_e)
$$
 still holds, summing it up over all edges gives us 
$$
C(f^*) 
	\ge \underbrace{\sum_{e \in E} f_e^* c_e(f_e)}_{ \ge (1 + \delta) r L} 
	- \underbrace{\sum_{e \in E} f_e c_e(f_e)}_{ = rL}
	\ge \delta r L = \delta \cdot C(f),
$$
so finally $C(f) \le \frac{1}{\delta} C(f^*)$, which is what we wanted to show.

### Exercise 51

For this problem, let's consider a Pigou-like network with polynomial cost function $c(x) = x^d$. We'll try to vary the degree $d$ to show that the bound is tight. 

With $r$ units of traffic, the cost of the equilibrium flow is $C(\text{EQ}) = r \cdot c(r) = r^{d+1}$. 

With $(1+\delta r)$ units of traffic, the cost of the optimal flow is the solution to the following minimization problem:
$$
C(\text{OPT}) = \min_{x \ge 0} \left[ x \cdot c(x) + ((1+\delta) r - x) \cdot c(r) \right].
$$
 The derivative of this function for arbitrary $c$ is $c(x) + x \cdot c^\prime(x) - c(r)$, which in our case gives $x^d (d+1) - r^d$. Equating this to zero and solving w.r.t. gives us the optimal amount of traffic to be sent to the upper edge:
$$
x = \frac{r}{\sqrt[d]{d+1}},
$$
so now 
$$
C(\text{OPT})
	= r \cdot \frac{r^d}{d+1} + \left((1 + \delta) r - \frac{r}{\sqrt[d]{d+1}}\right) \cdot r^d
	= \underbrace{r^{d+1}}_{=C(\text{EQ})} \cdot \left[ \delta + \left(1 - \frac{d}{(d+1)^{1+\frac{1}{d}}} \right) \right].
$$
The expression $1 - \frac{d}{(d+1)^{1+1/d}}$ can be made arbitrarily  small by increasing $d$ sufficiently, so for given $\delta$ and $\epsilon$ it's just a problem of selection of $d$ so that
$$
C(\text{EQ}) \ge \left(\frac{1}{\delta} - \epsilon \right) \cdot C(\text{OPT}),
$$
which concludes the proof of tightness of the bound.

### Exercise 52

Again, the proof of the statement is very similar to the one for single-commodity networks. By summing the inequality
$$
f_e^* \left[ c_e(f_e) - c_e(f_e^*)\right] \le f_e c_e(f_e)
$$
over all edges, and keeping in mind total costs of paths from the exercise 47, we arrive to 
$$
C(f^*) 
	\ge \underbrace{\sum_{e \in E} f_e^* c_e(f_e)}_{ \ge 2 \sum_{i=1}^k r_i L_i} 
	- \underbrace{\sum_{e \in E} f_e c_e(f_e)}_{ = \sum_{i=1}^k r_i L_i} 
	\ge C(f).
$$

### Exercise 53

The inequality can be directly checked for pairs $(0, 0)$, $(0, 1)$, $(1, 0)$, $(1, 1)$. 

We need to show that $5 y^2 + z^2 \ge 3 y + 3 z y$. Rewrite  left hand side as $(2y^2) + (3y^2 + z^2)$ and compare respective terms: 

* $2 y^2 \ge 3y$ for all integer $y > 1$, so we have the first part;
* $3 y^2 + z^2 \ge 2\sqrt{3} y z$ by the Cauchy inequality; $2 \sqrt{3} > 3$, so now we have the second part.

Adding two inequalities gives us the desired result.

### Exercise 54

